=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

moar - a runtime for Raku

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    moar --version
    moar [--dump] [--crash] [--libpath=...] [--full-cleanup] inputfile

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<moar> is the binary of MoarVM, (short for Metamodel On A Runtime Virtual
Machine). It can be used to execute C<.moarvm> bytecode files.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

moar respects the following environment variables:

=over

=item MVM_JIT_DISABLE

Disables the just-in-time compiler (JIT). This is ignored if MoarVM was built
without JIT support.

=item MVM_SPESH_DISABLE

Disables the runtime bytecode specializer / optimizer.

=item MVM_SPESH_INLINE_DISABLE

Disables inlining of call frames inside the bytecode specializer.

=item MVM_SPESH_OSR_DISABLE

Disables the on-stack replacement feature of the bytecode specializer.

=item MVM_CROSS_THREAD_WRITE_LOG

Tells MoarVM to insert instrumentation to detect when a thread does a write
to an object it didn't allocate and doesn't have a lock for.

=item MVM_CROSS_THREAD_WRITE_LOG_INCLUDE_LOCKED

Same as MVM_CROSS_THREAD_WRITE_LOG, except objects that are locked are included
as well.

=item MVM_COVERAGE_LOG

If set, MoarVM instruments bytecode to log a C<HIT E<lt>fileE<gt> E<lt>lineE<gt>>
entry to this file each time a new source line is entered. If the value is an
empty string the log is written to stderr. The file is opened in append mode.
If the path contains C<%d> it is replaced with the process ID.

By default each (file, line) pair is logged once per static frame ("de-duped").
See C<MVM_COVERAGE_CONTROL> to disable.

=item MVM_COVERAGE_CONTROL

Controls de-duping behaviour of C<MVM_COVERAGE_LOG>. If set to C<1>, the
non-de-duping mode is enabled at runtime when C<nqp::coveragecontrol(1)> is
called. If set to C<2>, non-de-duping mode is enabled from the start of the
program. Has no effect unless C<MVM_COVERAGE_LOG> is also set.

=item MVM_COVERAGE_FILES

A comma-separated list of substrings. When set, only source files whose path
contains at least one of the substrings are instrumented for coverage. Other files
(such as the Raku standard library and NQP internals) are left uninstrumented and
incur no coverage overhead. Unset or empty means instrument everything
(the default). Has no effect unless C<MVM_COVERAGE_LOG> is also set.

=back

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Please use the issue tracker at L<https://github.com/moarvm/moarvm/issues> to
report bugs.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2012-2014 by the MoarVM contributors. See the F<CREDITS> file for
a list of contributors.

License: Artistic License 2.0. See the file F<Artistic2.txt> for more
information.

=cut

